N.
A.
M.
Good morning, everyone.
Welcome to day two or day five or day seven, depending
on when you got to Vancouver.
Very good to see your faces, especially since I hear about
some of the damage that happened last night that we're not
going to talk about.
So this morning, once again, we're at the media
and civics track here at Atmosphere Conf 2026
.
I'm Chad Gaholic from the Protocols for Pub
lishers project, you might have heard.
And we're going to kick off the morning with a discussion
with some of our news and journalist folks here.
And I'm just going to turn it over to Jim to
take over.
Thank you, Chad.
And thanks for the work that you do with Protocols for
Publishers.
I got to meet some of those folks in London a couple
of months ago, including our fine guests here today.
So thank you again.
My name is Jim.
I work at Blue Sky on our DevRel team.
If you have questions about how the platform works, you're
looking for the other Jim and he's giving a talk later
today.
I'm joined by Andra Rinnensland and Tyler
Fisher, both of whom have over, oh, I think
we're zeroing in on 15 years of media experience and
development experience as well.
just to show you that I'm the old guy.
They were getting into media as I was leaving it.
So, but we're going to, we're going to
talk a little bit about how and why news organizations should build
on at proto.
You'll notice that I throw out a bit of a ga
untlet about capitalization on at proto there.
And we also realized at the very last minute, we maybe
should have named this one, meet the press.
But so the really what we want to do is just kind
of like have kind of an open free form conversation about what
we've seen has worked.
Clearly, there's a lot of things that are not working
with media.
I think my approach has generally been to harass and harang
ue anyone who's in media and still on Twitter.
And that doesn't seem to be working.
So, I'm hoping Andra and Tyler have some better
solutions.
And so we'll start with Andra, who has been
working in media since the early 2010s.
And you're based in London.
That's correct?
Yeah, excellent.
So I'm going to hand it over to you.
And maybe you can kick us off with some of the approaches
that you have seen that have worked and maybe what's changing
a little bit.
Thanks.
Yeah, as mentioned, I'm Andre Renensland.
I run the news feed and trending news feeds on Blue Sky
.
And what has worked?
Well, so some of the things I find that really connect
with publishers is the identity system is like a really big part
of it, both in terms of being able to set your
username to your domain name for your newspaper, as well as
the new verification system, I think is really cool as well
, for news orgs to be able to verify their own
journalists instead of having to wait for some large tech company apparatus
to do that for them.
I think it's like a really powerful feature.
I'd also really love to see journalism societies kind of start
using more of the affordances of the platform in that way
.
Like for instance, like having, you know, journalism,
journalist unions might be like a really powerful place for doing the
verification layer.
I'm not sure if I answered the question in terms of
what's worked.
I think in general, the reach that Blue Sky gives news
orgs is really, really good.
And the kind of traffic that news orgs are getting from
Blue Sky is really impressive.
Anecdotally, I've talked to a few
orgs who have said that Blue Sky traffic has kind of
outpaced a lot of other social networks, even ones that
are like much, much bigger than Blue Sky.
And I think that is reflective of just how engaged with news
the Blue Sky community is and the atmosphere in general.
And it's interesting how there's kind of been this movement
of people who are really seriously interested in journalism to the platform
.
And I think kind of as builders, it's important to
think, how do we keep the momentum going and how do
we encourage more people to start making use of those affordances
?
Because I think kind of at this point, like, you
're right, like, you know, kind of trying to
bully people off of Twitter so that they just use Blue Sky
is probably a bit of a diminishing return strategy at this
point.
I think how we win is we start showing how the afford
ances of the platform of the atmosphere lend themselves to really good
journalism and good engagement with audience.
Thank you, Andra.
So and I realize I neglected to introduce folks.
So Andra's been working in the industry and runs the
breaking news feed, as you mentioned.
One thing that took me a minute about the breaking news feed
is that it actually works much better as an input to other
feeds.
And so when you can start inputting that into something like
Graze, then, but you've done the work of
going through and looking for basically every actual legitimate news organization that
's on the network.
And then Tyler, in addition to his previous life working in
media for companies like the New York Times, he runs an
app called SIL.
Do we have any SIL users in the house?
Fantastic.
And I won't even mention what SIL kind of resembles
from previous iterations of this.
But SIL is just a fantastic news aggregation app.
And so you log in with your blue sky account, with
your atmosphere account, with your Mastodon account even
.
And then it scrapes your timeline and finds all of the
links and then pulls those together.
So when multiple people are talking about the same thing, it
kind of groups them together in clusters and subjects and things like
that.
So Tyler, maybe you can sit, you can talk a
little bit about kind of your experience building SIL and,
and some of the conversations that you've had with publishers and
what resonates with them.
Yeah.
So I'm mostly known in the AT Pro space for S
IL.
Most of how I pay my bills is through consulting for news
organizations.
I don't work for the New York Times, but I
have worked for other large, large national news orgs.
With SIL, certainly my biggest user base is individual journalists
, um, because they are on social media to follow news
and communicate and have conversations about news.
Um, but also they have actual jobs that they have to
write and do reporting.
Um, so they can't be, um, on the
feed all day.
Um, some certainly are anyway, uh, there's definitely
an addictive property of, of microblogging.
Um, but, uh, I find a lot of journalists
are like, well, I, you know, I've
got to write and go to my meetings and do my thing
, but I can come back to SIL throughout the day
and see what the conversation has been at a glance, uh
, rather than having to scroll the three hours of my timeline
that I missed.
Um, there was, uh, first, before I say
this, uh, I want to get a feel in the
room.
How many people here are coming from the journalism side?
Like you work at a news org or somehow are affiliated with
news publishing.
Okay.
Small amount.
How many people are more like builders in this space?
Okay.
Almost everybody.
Great.
Um, so I feel like I can come with this from
two perspectives, right?
Why news organizations should be buying on AT pro buying in on
AT proto and also why they're not yet.
I think I can sort of give both sides of this.
So I think I'm going to tailor what I say to
why they're not yet.
Um, given who we have in the room.
Um, so I think, you know, having them join
blue sky is great and like, uh, you know,
blue sky offers, uh, better traffic and referral traffic than
the other platforms because it doesn't downrank links.
It has tools like SIL in the ecosystem that even do
even more to promote links.
You have the ability of, of custom feeds to like really
hone in on a topic or, or, or, or
things like that.
Or, or, um, as Andre has, uh,
talked about, uh, many times, like news orgs
themselves can build custom feeds that really, uh, center in
on their journalists and their communities.
And that's just a really powerful primitive that they can be
building on.
Um, last week, the verge reported that Google is re
writing headlines with AI in search results.
Um, I, I quote posted their, their post about
that and said, uh, this shit is why I'm
a journalism on AT proto extremist.
Um, so like, I'm, I'm, I
'm a believer, but I also get why they're not
.
And so when I say I'm an AT proto extremist
, um, for journalism, I'm not talking about just
be having an account on blue sky and linking to your journalism
.
I mean, putting your journalism on the protocol.
Right.
Um, and like standard.
site is a really exciting community that offers us some affordances
to do that.
Um, but I think there's some things that are missing
.
Right.
So, um, first standard site has no concept of auth
orship.
Um, and I think that's, uh, partially because
the I love the leaflet and pocket and off print folks
, they're focused on like solo bloggers for most of
the time.
Uh, whereas news organizations have many authors and, and many
contributors.
And like, you need a way to describe those relationships.
What desk does this person work for?
Are they a freelancer?
Uh, we need better ways on protocol of describing those relationships
for every individual document, um, and who worked on them
.
Uh, and then also the content lexicon thing is
, is a real, uh, problem to be solved.
Uh, it was announced yesterday that I, uh, am
receiving a small grant from the community fund.
Thank you to the community fund.
Um, uh, and I'm trying to work in this
space of like, how can we describe news content on the
protocol, uh, and work within, uh, the bounds
of standard.
site for that.
Um, even if we had all that, the thing that
is really missing is, like, a premium news reading experience
that's built on top of standard.
site.
Um, I, I talk a lot about Apple news on
AT Proto.
Um, Apple news offers a ton of reach.
Um, and I, I know this because I've implemented
Apple news at publications I've worked at, um, where
, uh, we would get a story promoted on Apple news
and it would just dwarf the traffic we got to our main
site.
Like orders of magnitude higher.
Um, but Apple news offered no way to, other than
following the publication on Apple news to deepen your relationship with a
reader.
And, uh, so we never were able to get them
to subscribe to our newsletters, to donate, to
become members.
Like there was just no facility for doing that stuff.
I think it was just such a huge opportunity.
If we can get the content on protocol and tell that story
to build a news aggregator that is actually owned and operated
by news publishers and offers them the opportunity to actually control their
distribution layer in a way that they'd never been able to
in the digital space.
Um, so that's my pitch at the moment.
One thing I keep coming back to and when I sit down
and actually think instead of just get mad about why there's
so many organizations that still really lean into Twitter and even individual
journalists, it's, it's, it really is just
all about the incentives.
And so it feels like there's an opportunity to kind of
move those incentives away from the traditional centralized protocols that we've
got now and, uh, onto something where there's a
lot more ownership.
Um, under, I'm kind of curious to get your
perspective a little bit, um, thinking about those incentives.
And I'm wondering if you have seen anything that has really
moved the needle, like in the feeds that you've created
, um, are, are there opportunities to either give news
organizations more feedback or allow them to kind of have some more
control over some of those things?
Um, so like more control over like what specific things?
Um, well, you know, so the content that they
're putting out, um, whether that's on their own
websites or on the protocol, you know, what, what
are things that we can do at kind of a technical level
to help drive those incentives away from platforms like Twitter that,
you know, D D platform their links or, um,
Facebook, which, uh, you know, deprioritizes
has been deprioritizing news for years now.
Um, well, uh, one thought I've had,
um, I think this is like originally, uh, De
vin from Grace's idea, um, is that to really
unlock the power of like custom feeds, um, as a
primitive that news orgs can start using, you need to
, like the discovery, um, story for custom feeds needs
to be improved in some way.
Um, I, I'm not entirely sure how the best
way of doing it, but, uh, I think De
vin's suggestion was to allow, um, if you create
a feed to have it be, to kind of pin it
more front and center on your user profile.
Say you are a news org and you create a feed of
all of the journalists at your news org.
And it's a way that you can see at a glance
what all the journalists at your news org are talking about.
At the moment, it's buried like four tabs deep onto
your profile.
And most people don't ever kind of, you know,
click through to that.
If you like have like little, you know, pin posts
, like maybe above your other pin posts being like, oh
, by the way, we have a, we have a
custom feed.
If you want to engage with our journalism that way, um
, that might encourage more news orgs to kind of start
using that affordance.
I think in general, um, news orgs are a
bit slow to discover the affordances that, um, AT
proto offers.
Um, I think in, I, I kind of have
a bit of a suspicion that if they weren't kind of
initially incentivized to use, uh, domain handles, um
, one of the aspects of, uh, the feeds that
I run is I require some kind of verification.
And prior to blue sky having a, uh, the decentralized
verification system that they have now, um, the only way
you could really do that was via domain handles.
Um, and so in order to verify titles, I require
they have a domain handle.
And I kind of suspect that if they weren't kind of
like incentivized to, to use that feature, they might
not have.
And we'd have a lot more news orgs with b
sky.
social handles.
So, um, you know, kind of as developers,
one thing we can do is start using the affordances ourselves
and showing how they can be used in a productive capacity.
Um, and I think kind of once we start doing that
, it'll be a lot easier for news orgs to
start using them themselves, but also again, discovery is,
I think one of the biggest challenges facing it.
Yeah.
Discovery is a huge issue there.
Tyler, I'm curious as somebody who builds a discovery platform
in some ways, what are, are there affordances that
we can either help with on the protocol or are there things
that publishers can do that would help make their work more discover
able outside of, you know, the big five platforms?
Yeah.
Um, a challenge I have in sill is getting metadata about
the link.
Um, which is really silly because in the head of every
HTML document is on news sites, especially our open graph tags
and JSON LD.
And the whole purpose of those tags is that so platforms like
mine can describe them.
However, this is largely due to LLMs, I
can no longer get that data because I get blocked every time
.
Um, uh, so I do all kinds of crazy browser
proxying stuff with Cloudflare and whatever to,
like, try to force them to render the page.
Uh, but it gets harder every day.
Um, and so, again, uh, journalism on the
into pro extremists.
If I had a standard site record to reference, this wouldn
't be a problem.
Um, I can just go get that.
Um, uh, so that, that's, you know
, part of my end goal is, um, having,
uh, the, the, the, the ways we get
link metadata on the web are broken by AI now.
Um, so I think the protocol offers an opportunity to put
that in a new space that is effectively a big decentralized database
and on the internet.
Um, so I'm really excited about that opportunity.
Um, I talked yesterday, uh, in a talk I
gave about atmospheric clients that, um, atmospheric clients in order
to win people over have to be immediately interesting.
Um, and so when you come to SIL, if
you've already invested a ton of time in the people you
follow and you have a good network, SIL is immediately
interesting.
If you haven't, it's not.
Um, so I've been thinking about how if you're
brand new to the atmosphere or like, you know, you
're, you're here, but you only follow 20 people
or something, how can I, uh, point you in
the direction of trustworthy news from SIL and say, okay
, follow these feeds, these starter packs, uh, or
whatnot.
Um, I can't maintain all those feeds and starter packs
by myself.
I would lose my mind.
Uh, so what's the community driven approach to, um
, uh, maintaining all that?
And it would be great if news orgs, you know
, uh, did that themselves and be like, here's
the, here's the New York Times journalism starter pack,
right?
And here's their custom feed of all their stories, uh
, and, and everything that journalists are talking about.
That would be great.
Um, so yeah, uh, journalism is on 90%
extremist.
My answer is always the protocol.
The, uh, point that you make about, uh,
open graph takes is like really interesting.
I, I ran into that, um, last week when
I was working on the news classifier at my talk yesterday
, I talked about labeler I've created that tries to
, uh, scan the open graph takes of news articles on
the newsfeed and applies a genre label.
So if it's like sports or entertainment or hard news or
whatever to it, and like, yeah, getting open graph
tags of all things is really challenging.
But what I actually ended up doing is I ended up,
um, just, uh, kind of using Cardi B
, which if unfamiliar is, uh, Blue Sky's,
uh, preview link previewer service that kind of pulls the
metadata.
And kind of the reason why that works is like, I
think news orgs have seen incoming requests from this Cardi
B dot BSky dot social domain and have like, kind
of like, uh, allow listed it, which means that
I can kind of get through those.
But yeah, it's, I would love to see standard
site become more of a thing that news orgs can use
to promote this information.
Speaker of the devil and he shall appear as, as standard
side as mentioned, look who shows up.
So in, in the last few minutes that we've got
here, we've got a room full of people who build
and a few media folks.
Um, I guess I'm curious from y'all's
perspective, what are the things that this crowd can go out
and build that we think either realistically or just completely pie in
the sky?
I, I have a bet with myself that, uh,
this is going to be the year of an ad proto native
CMS.
Um, so not just plugins that will, will, will
publish a standard site document, but, um, you know
, a full blown CMS, you know, beyond just like
the blogging tools are great.
We love you guys, but, um, you know,
something that, that can, that is actually useful in Tyler
, you were mentioning one of the challenges, um, is
that a news organization is composed of many people.
And, um, and so the idea of saving individual documents
to everybody's PDS doesn't really track.
And so, uh, Tyler, maybe I'll start with
you and then we can finish up with Andre.
Like, you know, what are the things that this crowd
can build that'll make the work that you do easier and
better, but also that will make the internet, uh,
a less crummy place?
Uh, yeah.
So the project I got a grant for, I called wire
service.
Um, and originally what the first thing I did with wire
service and the thing that the community fund, uh, got
in touch with me about was a WordPress plugin from, uh
, WordPress to standard dot site.
Uh, it works, but then, uh, automatic came
out with their own.
You should use theirs.
Um, I don't actually want to maintain a WordPress plugin
.
So, um, but I think we do need like a
full AT pro CMS would be amazing.
CMS migrations are so hard and take years, uh,
for larger news organizations to pull off.
So I'm at the moment more interested in, uh,
how do we get the publishing tools they're already using to
speak standard dot site, which is why I started with WordPress
, but ghost would also be great.
Um, Drupal.
I don't know if people still own Drupal.
Maybe Drupal.
Um, uh, yeah, great.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Then we need the, then we need a Drupal
plugin.
Um, uh, so yeah, I'd, I'd
love to see, uh, more, uh, tools that
help people from wherever they already are, uh, uh,
uh, speak AT proto.
Um, uh, so that's, that's what I
'm, you know, thinking about with wire service, uh
, in addition to like the lexicon, the sort
of middle piece, the content lexicon and the,
um, the renderer, the, the premium news experience
.
Yeah.
Um, all of that.
Uh, and like, you know, I, I quite
often describe, um, newsroom development as like CMS development
on hard mode.
Uh, and so many, you know, requirements that you
have in a newsroom CMS are like the sort of thing
you would, uh, not really think about if building like
a piece of blogging software.
So yeah, I totally agree that kind of building things where
people already are so that you can start talking like the dialect
s of, um, the atmosphere is, is I think
a really good starting point.
Uh, what I would personally like to see builders, uh
, do in terms of like this space is experimental labelers
.
Um, labels are such a cool technology.
They're not super hard to set up.
They're, they're a little bit finicky to set
up.
I'll, I'll, I'll take the back.
They're a little bit finicky to set up, but
like once you kind of get them like, you know,
talking to the app and everything else, they're, you
know, you can run a basic labeler like pretty easily
.
And, um, what that allows is something that like you
can't do on any other social platform.
You can, you know, write annotations to other people
's posts and let other people subscribe to those annotations,
being able to annotate like random pieces of content on the
network like that and have people be able to subscribe to that
.
That's a really cool feature.
And not only do you get that, but you also get
like, you can use it in like a moderation capacity.
Um, what I'd really love from like blue sky in
terms of that technology would be, uh, two things.
One, uh, links in descriptions, like in like label
descriptions, um, my media ownership labeler, I'd
love to create like a microsite that's, you know
, detailed information about the media ownership of like the companies that
it, uh, labels.
Um, but there's no way to kind of do,
you know, links via label descriptions yet.
But the other thing is, um, being able to do
like one-off labels.
Uh, I think if like you create one-off labels
that at the moment, like a label definition, it's
like if you create a label called something, um, they
'll have the same description every single time that label is,
is attached to a piece of content.
Whereas, um, I would love to be able to like
attach a unique label to pieces of content that can annotate
because that would open up the way to do some really cool
stuff in this space.
For instance, like, uh, fact checking would be like
one use case for that.
Um, you could, uh, as like a fact checking
org, you could add a label to post that, um
, kind of almost like a community notes sort of thing a
little bit.
Um, but at the moment that's like really challenging.
Kind of what you'd sort of have to do would be
to create like a microsite and have people post like,
you know, paste the link to the post or whatever.
It'd be messy.
Um, so yeah, like kind of like one-off
labels would be like a really, I think cool feature as
well.
Excellent.
That's fantastic.
We are just about out of time.
Uh, Jonathan Warden, who, uh, is here
, I keep running into him and he's giving a presentation
.
It might even be next, um, about he, he
essentially forked the, the blue sky app view and created
his own.
He calls blues notes and he did just that.
He added kind of a community notes feature.
And, um, so we're trying to figure out work
with him.
We've got our own product roadmap.
So we're trying to figure out how we can possibly wedge
something like community notes in there.
Um, really appreciate Andra and Tyler coming up and,
uh, and presenting.
I hope my help from this presentation is that y'all
will go away and have at least one amazing idea for how
we can help improve the media media ecosystem because it's not
just going to happen on its own.
Um, so we need to, we need folks to get
out there and build stuff.
So, um, please come talk to us, ask questions
.
Um, we'll be on the hallway track just like everybody
else.
So thanks again for coming out.
Appreciate it.
Thank you very much.